---
layout: project
title: Undergraduate Dissertation — Investigating Bias in Whisper
summary: Testing the Whisper very large language model (VLLM) for bias in speech recognition performance across speaker accents.
year: 2024
stack: [Python, PyTorch, Data Analysis, Statistics]
thumb: /assets/img/UOE.png  # card image (fill in)
hero:  /assets/img/UOE.png    # big still (fallback) (fill in)
#gif:   /assets/gif/ugdiss.gif         # animated demo (optional) (fill in)
png: true            # ← add this
links:
  - label: "Dissertation PDF"
    url: "/assets/pdfs/MINF.pdf" 
---

## Abstract

-- As written in the body of the project --

This project attempts to detect and analyse bias in the results of a Very Large ASR,
specifically Whisper by OpenAI. This testing is completed by comparing WER values
of transcriptions generated by Whisper on data from the Speech Accent Archive as
well as from the Edinburgh International Accent corpus. The results of L2 speakers
are classified using Language family and genus groups. Multiple tests are conducted
on multiple Whisper model sizes that extensively explore factors that illuminate ob-
scure vectors through which Whisper could demonstrate Bias against certain linguistic
backgrounds.
The results were analysed and groups that Whisper appeared to demonstrate significantly
worse performance on were highlighted, with discussion about the potential causes
of the bias, or patterns expressed between groups also explored.The results were also
statistically validated to see if the distributions of WER values were significantly
different.

## Implementation

- Repurposed and cleaned the George Mason University Speech Accent Archive into a large and vetted dataset.  
- Designed and ran large-scale experiments on Whisper to test bias across accents.  
- Applied data analysis and statistical methods to derive significant results.  

## Notes

- Represented the **largest dataset ever used to test Whisper** (by speaker number and variety) at the time of dissertation.  
- Demonstrated systematic bias in Whisper’s performance based on speaker accent.  
- Built reproducible pipelines for evaluation and analysis of ML projects. 
- While This project does represent a first foray into  
